Introduction
 by the Director-General
 Mental health has been hidden behind a curtain of stigma and discrimination for too long. It is time to bring it out into
 the open. The magnitude, suffering and burden in terms of disability and costs for individuals, families and societies
 are staggering. In the last few years, the world has become more aware of this enormous burden and the potential 
for mental health gains. We can make a difference using existing knowledge ready to be applied.
 We need to enhance our investment in mental health substantially and we need to do it now.
 What kinds of investment? 
Investment of financial and human resources. A higher proportion of national budgets should be allocated to develop
ing adequate infrastructure and services for mental health. At the same time, more human resources are needed to
 provide care for those with mental disorders and to protect and promote mental health. Countries, especially those
 with limited resources, need to establish specifically targeted policies, plans and initiatives to promote and support
 mental health.
 Who needs to invest? All of us with interest in the health and development of people and communities. This includes
 international organizations, development aid agencies, trusts/foundations, businesses and governments.
 What can we expect from such investment?
 It should be able to provide the much-needed services, treatment and support to a larger proportion of the nearly 
450 million people suffering from mental disorders than they receive at present: services that are more effective and
 more humane; treatments that help them avoid chronic disability and premature death; and support that gives them 
a life that is healthier and richer – a life lived with dignity. We can also expect greater financial returns from increased
 productivity and lower net costs of illness and care, apart from savings in other sector outlays. 
Overall, this investment will result in individuals and communities who are better able to avoid or cope with the stress
es and conflicts that are part of everyday life, and who will therefore enjoy a better quality of life and better health.
 Lee Jong-wook
 3
Executive Summary
 For all individuals, mental, physical
 and social health are vital and inter
woven strands of life. As our under
standing of this relationship grows, 
it becomes ever more apparent that
 mental health is crucial to the overall
 well-being of individuals, societies and
 countries. Indeed, mental health can
 be defined as a state of well-being
 enabling individuals to realize their
 abilities, cope with the normal stresses
 of life, work productively and fruitful
ly, and make a contribution to their
 communities. Unfortunately, in most
 parts of the world, mental health and
 mental disorders are not accorded
 anywhere near the same degree of
 importance as physical health. Rather,
 they have been largely ignored or
 neglected.
 The magnitude and burdens of the problem
 • As many as 450 million people suffer from a mental or behavioural disorder. 
• Nearly 1 million people commit suicide every year. 
• Four of the six leading causes of years lived with disability are due to 
neuropsychiatric disorders (depression, alcohol-use disorders, schizophrenia
 and bipolar disorder).
 • One in four families has at least one member with a mental disorder. 
Family members are often the primary caregivers of people with mental
 disorders. The extent of the burden of mental disorders on family members
 is difficult to assess and quantify, and is consequently often ignored. 
However, it does have a significant impact on the family’s quality of life. 
• In addition to the health and social costs, those suffering from mental 
illnesses are also victims of human rights violations, stigma and discrimi
nation, both inside and outside psychiatric institutions.
 4
 This publication aims to guide you in
 the discovery of mental health, in the
 magnitude and burdens of mental dis
orders, and in understanding what can
 be done to promote mental health in
 the world and to alleviate the burdens
 and avoid deaths due to mental disor
ders. Effective treatments and inter
ventions that are also cost-effective
 are now readily available. It is there
fore time to overcome barriers and
 work together in a joint effort to nar
row the gap between what needs to
 be done and what is actually being
 done, between the burden of mental
 disorders and the resources being used
 to address this problem. Closing the
 gap is a clear obligation not only for
 the World Health Organization, but
 also for governments, aid and devel
opment agencies, foundations,
 research institutions and the business
 community. 
The economic burden of mental disorders
 Given the prevalence of mental health and substance-dependence problems in adults and children, it is not surprising
 that there is an enormous emotional as well as financial burden on individuals, their families and society as a whole. 
The economic impacts of mental illness affect personal income, the ability of ill persons – and often their caregivers – 
to work, productivity in the workplace and contributions to the national economy, as well as the utilization of treatment
 and support services. The cost of mental health problems in developed countries is estimated to be between 3% and
 4% of GNP. However, mental disorders cost national economies several billion dollars, both in terms of expenditures
 incurred and loss of productivity. The average annual costs, including medical, pharmaceutical and disability costs, for
 employees with depression may be 4.2 times higher than those incurred by a typical beneficiary. However, the cost of
 treatment is often completely offset by a reduction in the number of days of absenteeism and productivity lost while 
at work.
 Alleviating the problem: prevention, promotion and management programmes
 A combination of well-targeted treatment and prevention programmes in the field of mental health, within overall pub
lic strategies, could avoid years lived with disability and deaths, reduce the stigma attached to mental disorders, increase
 considerably the social capital, help reduce poverty and promote a country’s development. 
Studies provide examples of effective programmes targeted at different age groups – from prenatal and early infancy
 programmes, through adolescence to old age – and different situations, such as post-traumatic stress following acci
dents, marital stress, work-related stress, and depression or anxiety due to job loss, widowhood or adjustment to retire
ment. Many more studies need to be conducted in this area, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. There is
 strong evidence to show that successful interventions for schizophrenia, depression and other mental disorders are not
 only available, but are also affordable and cost-effective.
 Yet there is an enormous gap between the need for treatment of mental disorders and the resources available. In devel
oped countries with well organized health care systems, between 44% and 70% of patients with mental disorders do
 not receive treatment. In developing countries the figures are even more startling, with the treatment gap being close 
to 90%.
 5
WHO’s Mental Health Global Action Programme (mhGAP)
 To overcome barriers to closing the gap between resources and the need for treatment of mental disorders, and to
 reduce the number of years lived with disability and deaths associated with such disorders, the World Health Organiza
tion has created the Mental Health Global Action Programme (mhGAP) as part of a major effort to implement the rec
ommendations of the World Health Report 2001 on mental health. The programme is based on strategies aimed at
 improving the mental health of populations. To implement those strategies, WHO is undertaking different projects and
 activities, such as the Global Campaign against Epilepsy, the Global Campaign for Suicide Prevention, building national
 capacity to create a policy on alcohol use, and assisting countries in developing alcohol-related services. WHO is also
 developing guidelines for mental health interventions in emergencies, and for the management of depression,
 schizophrenia, alcohol-related disorders, drug use, epilepsy and other neurological disorders. These projects are designed
 within a framework of activities which includes support to countries in monitoring their mental health systems, formulat
ing policies, improving legislation and reorganizing their services. These efforts are largely focused on low- and middle
income countries, where the service gaps are the largest.
 Investing in mental health today can generate enormous returns in terms of reducing disability and preventing prema
ture death. The priorities are well known and the projects and activities needed are clear and possible. It is our respon
sibility to turn the possibilities to reality. 
6
The burden of mental disorders is expected 
to rise significantly over the next 20 years:
 Are we doing enough to address the growing
 mental health challenges?
 What is mental health?
 Mental health is more than the mere lack
 of mental disorders. The positive dimen
sion of mental health is stressed in WHO’s
 definition of health as contained in its con
stitution: “Health is a state of complete
 physical, mental and social well-being and
 not merely the absence of disease or infir
mity.” Concepts of mental health include
 subjective well-being, perceived self-effica
cy, autonomy, competence, intergenera
tional dependence and recognition of the
 ability to realize one’s intellectual and emo
tional potential. It has also been defined as
 a state of well-being whereby individuals
 recognize their abilities, are able to cope
 with the normal stresses of life, work pro
ductively and fruitfully, and make a contri
bution to their communities. Mental health
 is about enhancing competencies of indi
viduals and communities and enabling
 them to achieve their self-determined
 goals. Mental health should be a concern
 for all of us, rather than only for those 
who suffer from a mental disorder.
 Mental health problems affect society 
as a whole, and not just a small, isolated
 segment. They are therefore a major
 challenge to global development. No
 group is immune to mental disorders, 
but the risk is higher among the poor,
 homeless, the unemployed, persons with
 low education, victims of violence,
 migrants and refugees, indigenous popu
lations, children and adolescents, abused
 women and the neglected elderly.
 For all individuals, mental, physical and
 social health are closely interwoven, vital
 strands of life. As our understanding of
 this interdependent relationship grows, it
 becomes ever more apparent that mental
 health is crucial to the overall well-being
 of individuals, societies and countries.
 Unfortunately, in most parts of the world,
 mental health and mental disorders are
 not accorded anywhere the same impor
tance as physical health. Rather, they
 have been largely ignored or neglected.
 7
The magnitude and burdens 
of mental disorders
 A huge toll
 Today, about 450 million people 
suffer from a mental or behavioural
 disorder. According to WHO’s Global
 Burden of Disease 2001, 33% of the
 years lived with disability (YLD) are
 due to neuropsychiatric disorders, a
 further 2.1% to intentional injuries
 (Figure 1). Unipolar depressive disor
ders alone lead to 12.15% of years
 lived with disability, and rank as the
 third leading contributor to the global
 burden of diseases. Four of the six
 leading causes of years lived with 
disability are due to neuropsychiatric
 disorders (depression, alcohol-use 
disorders, schizophrenia and bipolar
 disorder). 
1
 Years lived with disability (YLD): 
World 
67%
 33%
 Neuropsychiatric disorders
 Others
 Source: WHR, 2002
 2
 Burden of diseases worldwide: Disability adjusted life years (DALYs), 2001
 Nutritional deficiencies 2%
 Perinatal conditions 7%
 Maternal conditions 2%
 Respiratory infections 6%
 Malaria 3%
 Childhood diseases 3%
 Diarrhoeal diseases 4%
 HIV/AIDS 6%
 Tuberculosis 2%
 Other CD causes 6%
 Injuries 12%
 Other NCDs 1%
 Malignant neoplasms 5%
 Diabetes 1%
 Neuropsychiatric disorders 13%
 Sense organ disorders 3%
 Cardiovascular diseases 10%
 Congenital abnormalities 2%
 Musculoskeletal diseases 2%
 Neuropsychiatric conditions account
 for 13% of disability adjusted life
 years (DALYs), intentional injuries for
 3.3% and HIV/AIDS for another 6%
 (Figure 2). These latter two have a
 behavioural component linked to
 mental health. Moreover, behind
 these oft-repeated figures lies enor
mous human suffering. 
• More than 150 million persons suf
fer from depression at any point in
 time; 
• Nearly 1 million commit suicide
 every year; 
Respiratory diseases 4%
 Digestive diseases 3%
 Diseases of the genitourinary system 1%
 Source: WHR, 2002
 • About 25 million suffer from
 schizophrenia; 
• 38 million suffer from epilepsy; and
 • More than 90 million suffer from an
 alcohol- or drug-use disorder. 
The number of individuals with disor
ders is likely to increase further in view
 of the ageing of the population, wors
ening social problems and civil unrest. 
This growing burden amounts to a
 huge cost in terms of human misery,
 disability and economic loss.
 8
Mental and behavioural problems 
as risk factors for morbidity and mortality
 It is becoming increasingly clear that
 mental functioning is fundamentally
 interconnected with physical and
 social functioning and health out
comes. For example, depression is a
 risk factor for cancer and heart dis
eases. And mental disorders such as
 depression, anxiety and substance
use disorders in patients who also 
suffer from physical disorders may
 result in poor compliance and failure
 to adhere to their treatment sched
ules. Furthermore, a number of
 behaviours such as smoking and sex
ual activities have been linked to the
 development of physical disorders
 such as carcinoma and HIV/AIDS. 
Among the 10 leading risk factors for
 the global burden of disease measured
 in DALYs, as identified in the World
 Health Report 2002, three were men
tal/behavioural (unsafe sex, tobacco
 use, alcohol use) and three others
 were significantly affected by men
tal/behavioural factors (overweight,
 blood pressure and cholesterol).
 Photo: © WHO, P. Virot
 9
Mental disorders and medical illness are interrelated
 Treating comorbid depression could increase adherence 
to interventions for chronic medical illness
 Comorbid depression is the existence of a depressive disorder (i.e. major
 depression, dysthymia or adjustment disorder) along with a physical disease
 (infectious, cardiovascular diseases, neurological disorders, diabetes mellitus
 or cancer). It is neither a chance phenomenon nor a mere feeling of demoral
ization or sadness brought on by the hardships of a chronic illness. While the
 prevalence of major depression in the general population can go from an
 average 3% up to 10%, it is consistently higher in people affected by chronic
 disease (Figure 3). 
Patients with comorbid depression are less likely to adhere to medical treat
ment or recommendations, and are at increased risk of disability and mortality. 
For example, it has been shown that depressed patients are three times more
 likely not to comply with medical regimens than non-depressed patients;
 there is also evidence that depression predicts the incidence of heart disease.
 In the case of infectious diseases, non-adherence can lead to drug resistance,
 and this has profound public health implications concerning resistant infec
tious agents.
 Illness-associated depression impairs quality of life and several aspects of the
 functioning of patients with chronic diseases; moreover, it results in higher
 health care utilization and costs.
 Clinical trials have consistently demonstrated the efficacy of antidepressant
 treatment in patients with comorbid depression and chronic medical illness.
 Such treatment improves their overall medical outcomes.
 Comorbidity, which signifies the simul
taneous occurrence in a person of two
 or more disorders, is a topic of consid
erable and growing interest in the
 context of health care. Research sup
ports the view that a number of men
tal disorders (e.g. depression, anxiety,
 substance abuse) occur in people suf
fering from both non-communicable
 and communicable diseases more
 often than would be expected by
 chance. And people suffering from
 chronic physical conditions have a
 greater probability of developing
 mental disorders such as depression.
 Rates of suicide are higher among
 people with physical disorders than
 among other people. 
Comorbidity results in lower adher
ence to medical treatment, an increase
 in disability and mortality, and higher
 health costs. However, comorbid men
tal disorders are often underrecog
nized and not always effectively
 treated. Increased awareness and
 understanding, as well as comprehen
sive integrated management may alle
viate the burden caused by comorbid
 mental disorders on the individual,
 society and the health services.
 10
3
 Prevalence of major depression in patients with physical illnesses
 Hypertension
 Myocardial infarction
 Epilepsy
 Stroke
 Diabetes
 Cancer
 HIV/AIDS
 Tuberculosis
 up to 29%
 up to 22%
 up to 30%
 up to 31%
 General 
population
 up to 27%
 up to 33%
 up to 10%
 up to 44%
 up to 46%
 0 10 20 30 4
 0 50
 Source: WHO, 2003, unpublished document
 Photo: © WHO, A.S. Kochar
 11
Mental disorders: a significant burden on the family.
 The burden of mental disorders goes beyond that which has been defined
 by Disability Adjusted Life Years. 
The extent of the burden of mental disorders on family members is difficult
 to assess and quantify, and is consequently often ignored. However, it does
 have a significant impact on the family’s quality of life.
 Family burden cannot be ignored
 Family members are often the primary
 caregivers of people with mental dis
orders. They provide emotional and
 physical support, and often have to
 bear the financial expenses associated
 with mental health treatment and
 care. It is estimated that one in four
 families has at least one member cur
rently suffering from a mental or
 behavioural disorder. In addition to
 the obvious distress of seeing a loved
one disabled by the consequences of 
a mental disorder, family members are
 also exposed to the stigma and dis
crimination associated with mental ill
 health. Rejection by friends, relatives,
 neighbours and the community as a
 whole can increase the family’s sense
 of isolation, resulting in restricted
 social activities, and the denial of
 equal participation in normal social
 networks.
 Informal caregivers need more sup
port. The failure of society to
 acknowledge the burden of mental
 disorders on affected families means
 that very little support is available to
 them. Expenses for the treatment of
 mental illness are often borne by the
 family because they are generally not
 covered by the State or by insurance.
 Family members may need to set
 aside a significant amount of their
 Talking about mental disorders means 
talking about stigma and human rights
 Persons with mental disorders often
 suffer a wide range of human rights
 violations and social stigma.
 In many countries, people with mental
 disorders have limited access to the
 mental health treatment and care they
 require, due to the lack of mental
 health services in the area in which
 they live or in the country as a whole.
 For example, the WHO Atlas Survey
 showed that 65% of psychiatric beds
 are in mental hospitals, where condi
tions are extremely unsatisfactory.
 Inpatient places should be moved
 from mental hospitals to general 
hospitals and community rehabilita
tion services.
 Violations in psychiatric
 institutions are rife
 Many psychiatric institutions have
 inadequate, degrading and even
 harmful care and treatment practices,
 as well as unhygienic and inhuman liv
time to care for a person with a men
tal disorder. Unfortunately, the lack of
 understanding on the part of most
 employers, and the lack of special
 employment schemes to address this
 issue, sometimes render it difficult for
 family members to gain employment
 or to hold on to an existing job, or
 they may suffer a loss of earnings due
 to days taken off from work. This
 compounds the financial costs associ
ated with treating and caring for
 someone with a mental disorder. 
ing conditions. For example, there
 have been documented cases of peo
ple being tied to logs far away from
 their communities for extensive peri
ods of time and with inadequate food,
 shelter or clothing. Furthermore, often
 people are admitted to and treated in
 mental health facilities against their
 will. Issues concerning consent for
 admission and treatment are often
 ignored, and independent assessments
 of capacity are not undertaken. This
 12
In addition to the social and economic toll,
 those suffering from mental illnesses are also
 victims of human rights violations, stigma
 and discrimination. 
means that people can be locked
 away for extensive periods of time,
 sometimes even for life, despite hav
ing the capacity to decide their future
 and lead a life within their community.
 Violations also occur outside
 institutions: the stigma of mental
 illness 
In both low- and high-income coun
tries, there is a long history of people
 with mental disorders being stigma
tized along with their families. This is
 manifested by stereotyping, fear,
 embarrassment, anger, and rejection
 or avoidance. The myths and miscon
ceptions associated with mental disor
ders negatively affect the day-to-day
 lives of sufferers, leading to discrimi
nation and the denial of even the
 most basic human rights. All over the
 world, people with mental disorders
 face unfair denial of employment and
 educational opportunities, and dis
crimination in health insurance and
 housing policies. In certain countries,
 mental disorders can be grounds for
 denying people the right to vote and
 to membership of professional associ
ations. In others, a marriage can be
 annulled if the woman has suffered
 from a mental disorder. Such stigma
 and discrimination can, in turn, affect
 a person’s ability to gain access to
 appropriate care, recover from his or
 her illness and integrate into society.
 Human rights violations of people with mental disorders: the voice of sufferers
 Caged beds
 Many psychiatric institutions, general hospitals and social care homes in countries continue to use caged beds routinely
 to restrain patients with mental disorders and mental retardation. Caged beds are beds with netting or, in some cases,
 metal bars, which serve to physically restrain the patients. Patients are often kept in caged beds for extended periods,
 sometimes even years. This type of restraint is often used when staff levels or training are inadequate, and sometimes
 as a form of punishment or threat of punishment. The use of restraints such as caged beds restricts the mobility of
 patients, which can result in a number of physical hazards such as pressure sores, not to mention the harmful psycho
logical effects. People have described the experience as being emotionally devastating, frightening, humiliating, degrad
ing and disempowering. (Caged Beds – Inhuman and Degrading Treatment in Four EU Accession Countries, Mental
 Disability Advocacy Center, 2003)
 Chained and burned due to accidental fire
 August 2001: Twenty-five people were charred to death in Erwadi, India. A devastating fire broke out at 5 a.m. in the
 asylum. Of the 46 with mental disorders, 40 had been chained to their beds. Erwadi had long been considered a holy
 place, famous for its dargah. During the course of the “treatment”, the persons with mental disorders were frequently
 caned, whipped and beaten up in the name of “driving away the evil”. During the day, they were tied to trees with
 thick ropes. At night, they were tied to their beds with iron chains. (www.indiatogether.org)
 13
The economic burden 
of mental disorders
 Given the prevalence of mental health
 and substance-dependence problems
 in adults and children, the emotional,
 but also financial, burden on individu
als, their families and society as a
 whole is enormous, as noted earlier.
 The economic impacts of mental ill
ness include its effects on personal
 income, the ability of the persons with
 mental disorders or their caregivers to
 Table 1. The overall economic burden of mental disorders
 Care costs
 Productivity costs
 work and make productive contribu
tions to the national economy, as well
 as the utilization of treatment and
 support services (Table 1). 
Other costs
 Sufferers
 Treatment and service 
Work disability;
 fees/payments
 lost earnings
 Anguish/suffering;
 treatment side-effects; suicide 
Family and friends
 Informal care-giving
 Time off work
 Anguish; isolation; stigma
 Employers
 Contributions to treatment and care Reduced productivity
Society
 Provision of mental health care
 and general medical care
 (taxation/insurance)
 Reduced productivity
 Loss of lives;
 untreated illnesses
 (unmet needs); social exclusion
 To gauge the measurable economic
 burden of mental illness, in table 2 the
 diverse economic impacts have been
 transformed into a single cost-based
 measure, and organized by types of
 Table 2. Types of measurable costs
 Core costs
 costs based on expenditures made or
 resources lost.
 An important characteristic of mental
 disorders is that mortality is relatively
 low, onset often occurs at a young age,
 and the indirect costs derived from lost
 or reduced productivity in the work
place are high. 
Other non-health costs
 Direct costs
 (payments made)
 • Treatment and service fees/payments
 • Social welfare administration
 • Public and private criminal justice system
 • Transportation
 Indirect costs
 (resources lost)
 14
 • Morbidity costs (in terms of value of lost productivity) • Value of family caregivers’ time
 • Mortality costs
Mental disorders impose a range of costs on
 individuals, households, employers and
 society as a whole.
 How much does mental illness cost?
 Estimates of costs are not available for
 all the various disorders, and certainly
 not for all the countries in the world.
 Most methodologically sound studies
 have been conducted in the United
 States and the United Kingdom. At
 1990 prices, mental health problems
 accounted for about 2.5% of GNP in
 the United States (Rice et al., 1990).
 In the Member States of the European
 Union the cost of mental health prob
lems is estimated to be between 3%
 and 4% of GNP (ILO, 2000), of which
 health-care costs account for an aver
age of 2% of GNP. 
• For the United States Rice and col
leagues calculated an aggregate cost
 of US$ 148 billion (at 1990 prices)
 for all mental disorders. One of the
 most important findings is that the
 indirect costs either match or out
weigh the direct costs for all mental
 health areas. Spending on treatment
 for mental health and substance
 abuse in the United States alone was
 estimated at US$ 85.3 billion in
 1997: US$ 73.4 billion for mental 
illness and US$ 11.9 billion for sub
stance abuse (Mark et al., 2000).
 • The estimated total burden of men
tal health problems in Canada for
 1998 was at least Can$ 14.4 billion:
 Can$ 8.1 billion in lost productivity
 and Can$ 6.3 billion for treatments
 (Stephens & Joubert, 2001). This
 makes mental health problems one
 of the costliest conditions in Canada.
 • Patel and Knapp (1997) estimated
 the aggregate costs of all mental
 disorders in the United Kingdom at
 £32 billion (1996/97 prices), 45% of
 which was due to lost productivity.
 Photo: © WHO, A. Waak
 15
Mental health problems in childhood 
generate additional costs in adulthood
 The costs of childhood disorders can
 be both large and largely hidden
 (Knapp et al., 1999). Early onset of
 mental disorders disrupts education
 and early careers (Kessler et al., 1995).
 The consequences in adulthood can
 be enormous if effective treatment is
 not provided (Maughan & Rutter,
 4
 1998). Knapp shows in figure 4 that
 children with conduct disorders gener
ate substantial additional costs from
 ages 10 to 27 years. These are not
 mainly related to health, as one would
 expect, but to education and criminal
 justice, creating a serious challenge for
 the social capital as a whole. 
Costs in adulthood of childhood mental health problems
 Additional costs from 10-27 years (in £)
 80 000
 70 000
 60 000
 50 000
 40 000
 30 000
 20 000
 10 000
 0
 No problems
 Conduct problems
 Conduct disorder
 Criminal justice
 Benefits
 Relationships
 Social care
 Health
 Education
 Source: Knapp, 2003
 16
High costs of mental disorders 
compared to other major chronic conditions
 A recent comparative study of the
 burdens of disease carried out within
 the United Kingdom’s National Health
 Service (NHS) demonstrated the rela
tive and absolute costs of care for a
 wide range of disorders, including the
 5
 NHS burdens of disease, 1996
 £ million, 1992/93
 Psychosis 
comparatively high annual expendi
ture associated with chronic disease
 conditions such as psychosis and neu
rosis (NHS Executive, 1996; Figure 5
 below). 
Neurosis 
Diabetes 
Breast cancer 
Ischaemic 
Heart Disease 
 Hypertension
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1000
 1200
 Inpatient
 Outpatient
 Primary care
 Pharmaceuticals
 Community health
 Social services (adults)
 Source: NHS Executive, 1996
 17
Another recent study (Berto et al.,
 2000) presents prevalence and total
 management costs of diseases such as
 Alzheimer’s, asthma, cancer, depres
sion, osteoporosis, hypertension and
 schizophrenia. As shown in figure 6
 6 
for the United States, three mental
 disorders considered by Berto et al.
 (Alzheimer’s disease, depression and
 schizophrenia) present a high preva
lence-cost ratio. 
Prevalence and cost of major chronic conditions: United States
 (in millions)
 120
 100
 80
 60
 40
 20
 0
 cost (US$ '000)
 prevalence (n° patients)
 Source: Berto et al., 2000
 18
 CHF: congestive heart failure
 CHD: coronary heart disease
 Alzheimer
 arthritis
 asthma
 cancer
 CHF
 CHD
 depression
 diabetes
 hypertension
 osteoporosis
 stroke
 schizophrenia
7
 Even more interesting is to consider
 different diseases in terms of the aver
age cost per patient, as shown in fig
ure 7: Alzheimer’s disease and
 schizophrenia are the two most costly
 diseases, their average cost per patient
 being higher than cancer and stroke. 
Yearly cost per patient of selected major conditions: United States
 US$/patient/year
 25000
 20000
 15000
 10000
 5000
 0
 CHF: congestive heart failure
 CHD: coronary heart disease
 Source: Berto et al., 2000
 In many developed countries, 35% to 45% of 
absenteeism from work is due to mental health problems
 In the United States, mental illness is
 considered responsible for an estimat
ed 59% of the economic costs deriv
ing from injury or illness-related loss
 of productivity, followed by alcohol
 abuse at 34% (Rouse, 1995). A report
 from a Canadian university (Université
 Laval, 2002) revealed that absences
 for psychological reasons had
 increased 400% from 1993 to 1999,
 and that the costs of replacement,
 together with those of salary insur
ance, amounted to Can$ 3 million for
 the year 2001. A survey on psychiatric
 morbidity in the United Kingdom
 showed that people with psychosis
 took an average of 42 days a year off
 work. The same survey reveals that
 persons with two or more neurotic
 disorders had an average of 28 days
 off per year compared to 8 days off
 for those with one neurotic disorder
 (Patel & Knapp, 1997).
 Alzheimer
 arthritis
 asthma
 CHF
 CHD
 depression
 19
 diabetes
 hypertension
 osteoporosis
 schizophrenia
 cancer
 stroke
Decreased productivity at work: 
even if an employee does not take sick leave, mental health problems 
can result in a substantial reduction in the usual level of activity and performance
 A recent study from Harvard Medical
 School examined the impact of psy
chiatric disorders on work loss days
 (absence from work) among major
 occupational groups in the United
 States (Kessler & Frank, 1997). The
 average number of work loss days
 attributable to psychiatric disorders
 was 6 days per month per 100 work
ers; and the number of work cutback
 days (getting less done than usual)
 was 31 days per month per 100 work
Photo: © WHO, P. Virot
 ers. Although the effects on work loss
 were not significantly different across
 occupations, the effects on work cut
back were greater among professional
 workers. Work loss and cutback were
 found to be more prevalent among
 those with comorbid disorders than
 among those with single disorders.
 The study presents an annualized
 national projection of over 4 million
 work loss days and 20 million work
 cutback days in the United States.
 20
Mental illness affects access 
to the job market and job retention
 The special case of depression
 The burden of depression is rising, affecting both the working and social lives
 of individuals.
 In the United States, it has been estimated that 1.8% to 3.6% of workers
 suffer from a major depression, and that employees with depression are 
disabled at nearly twice the rate of persons without depression (Goldberg 
& Steury, 2001). In 2000, 7.8 million Canadians were treated for depression,
 which represents an increase of 36% compared to the previous year.
 In a large United States financial services company, depression resulted in an
 average of 44 work-days taken off for short-term disability as compared to
 42 days for heart disease, 39 days for lower back pain, and 21 days for asth
ma (Conti & Burton, 1994). Studies suggest that the average annual costs,
 including medical, pharmaceutical and disability costs, for employees with
 depression may be 4.2 times higher than those incurred by a typical benefi
ciary (Birnbaum & al., 1999). However, it has also been found that the cost
 of treatment for depression is completely offset by a reduction in the number
 of days of absenteeism. Moreover, it is demonstrated that the cost of achiev
ing a partial or full remission from major depression declined between 1991
 and 1996. 
If the burden of depression is rising, costs to treat it are declining, and the
 quality of care has been improving over time. Specific investments to prevent
 and cure major depression can and should be made in both developed and
 developing countries.
 In the United States 5–6 million work
ers between the ages of 16 and 54
 years either lose, fail to seek, or cannot
 f
 ind employment as a consequence of
 mental illness. Among those who do
 manage to find work, it has been esti
mated that mental illness decreases
 annual income by US$ 3500 to
 US$ 6000 (Marcotte & Wilcox-Gok,
 2001).
 In the United Kingdom, a 1995 sur
vey revealed that over half of the
 people with psychosis were classed as
 permanently unable to work, about a
 f
 ifth were in employment and one in
 eight was unemployed (Patel &
 Knapp, 1997). 
Individuals with comorbid mental 
and physical disorders consistently
 have lower rates of employment 
than persons with a physical disorder
 alone. In several surveys, approxi
mately 20% fewer individuals with
 both physical and mental disorders
 reported being employed than indi
viduals with only a physical disorder
 (McAlpine & Warner, 2002).
 21
The burden of substance abuse
 • 76.3 million persons are diagnosed
 with alcohol disorders; 
• At least 15.3 million persons are
 affected by disorders related to drug
 use;
 • Between 5 and 10 million people
 currently inject drugs; 
• 5%–10% of all new HIV infections
 globally result from injecting drugs; 
• More than 1.8 million deaths in
 2000 were attributed to alcohol
related risks;
 8
 Deaths in 2000 attributed to addictive substance abuse-related risks  
Alcohol
 Illicit
 drugs
 0
 • 205,000 deaths in 2000 were
 attributed to illicit drug use (Figure 8);
 • The government, drug abusers and
 their families shoulder the main eco
nomic burden of drug abuse; and
 • For every dollar invested in drug
 treatment, seven dollars are saved in
 health and social costs.
 500
 1000
 1500
 Number of deaths (000s)
 which could have been prevented.
 Alcohol abuse is also responsible for
 neuropsychiatric disorders, domestic
 violence, child abuse and neglect, and
 productivity loss. 
2000
 High mortality developing countries
 Low mortality developing countries
 Developed countries
 Source: WHO, 2002
 dents – both pedestrians and drivers 
had blood alcohol levels exceeding the
 legal limits (Van Kralingen et al, 1991).
 Foetal alcohol syndrome is by far the
 most common cause of mental disabil
ity in the country (Department of
 Trade and Industry, 1997).
 Abuse of alcohol and other substances
 continues to be one of the most serious
 public health problems in both devel
oped and developing countries. World
wide, alcohol accounted for 4% of the
 total burden of diseases in 2000. 
In Latin American countries, alcohol
 was the leading risk factor for the
 global burden of diseases in 2000. Of
 an estimated 246,000 alcohol-related
 deaths in this region, about 61,000
 were due to unintentional and inten
tional injuries (WHO, 2002), all of
 In South Africa, 25%–30% of general
 hospital admissions are directly or indi
rectly related to alcohol abuse (Alber
tyn & McCann, 1993), and 60%
75% of admissions in specialized sub
stance abuse treatment centres are for
 alcohol-related problems and depen
dence. Almost 80% of all assault
 patients (both males and females) 
presenting to an urban trauma unit in
 Cape Town were either under the
 influence of alcohol, or injured
 because of alcohol-related violence
 (Steyn, 1996). The majority of victims
 of train-related accidents, traffic acci
In Asia, substance abuse is considered
 the main cause in 18% of cases pre
senting problems in the workplace
 (EAP, 2002). In Thailand, the percent
age of substance abusers aged 12–65
 years varies from 8.6% to 25% in 
different regions of the country, the
 highest percentage being in the north
east. In New Zealand (with a popula
tion of 3.4 million) alcohol-related lost
 productivity among the working pop
ulation was estimated to be US$ 57
 million a year (Jones et al., 1995).
 22
In the United States, the total eco
nomic cost of alcohol abuse was esti
mated at US$ 185 billion for 1998
 (Harwood, 2000). More than 70% 
of this cost was attributed to lost pro
ductivity (US$ 134.2 billion), including
 losses from alcohol-related illness
 (US$ 87.6 billion), premature death
 (US$ 36.5 billion) and crime
 (US$ 10.1 billion). Health care expen
ditures accounted for US$ 26.3 billion,
 of which US$ 7.5 billion was spent on
 treating alcohol abuse and depen
dence and US$ 18.9 billion on treating
 the adverse medical consequences of
 alcohol consumption. Other estimated
 costs included property and adminis
trative costs due to alcohol-related
 automobile crashes (US$ 15.7 billion),
 and the costs of the criminal justice
 system for alcohol-related crime
 (US$ 6.3 billion) (Figure 9).
 In the United Kingdom, about
 150,000 people are admitted to hos
pital each year due to alcohol-related
 accidents and illnesses. Alcohol is
 associated with up to 22,000 deaths 
a year. Deaths from cirrhosis of the
 liver have nearly doubled in the last
 10 years. A recent government report
 shows that alcohol abuse costs the
 country at least £20 billion a year. 
The study found that 17 million work
9
 days are lost to hangovers and alcohol
related illnesses each year. This costs
 employers £6.4 billion. One in 26 NHS
 “bed days” is taken up by alcohol
related illness, resulting in an annual
 cost to the taxpayer of £1.7 billion.
 The cost of clearing up alcohol-related
 crime is a further £7.3 billion a year.
 Moreover, drink leads to a further 
£6 billion in “social costs”.
 Cost of alcohol abuse in USA, billion US$, 1998
 150
 120
 90
 60
 30
 0
 lost 
 productivity 
health care
 vehicle crashes criminal justice 
system
 Source: Harwood, 2000
 23
Diseases related to alcohol and sub
stance abuse are therefore a serious
 public problem. They affect develop
ment of the human and social capital,
 creating not only economic costs for
 10
 society as a whole, including the
 health system, but also social costs in
 terms of injuries, violence and crime.
 They also affect the well-being of
 future generations (Figure 10).
 Excessive alcohol consumption and impaired health of the family
 More money 
is spent on 
alcohol
 Excessive 
alcohol 
consumption
 Less income, 
more loans
 Sickness,  
absenteeism, 
job loss
 Minor 
convictions
 Accidents and 
injuries
 Financial 
problems
 Less food, 
less education
 Poor living 
conditions
 Wife and 
children have 
to work
 Less health 
care
 Gambling
 24
 Social stigma
 Health  
of family 
members
 Malnutrition
 Infections  
like TB, worm 
infestation
 Stunted 
development 
of children
Talking about mental disorders means talking 
about poverty: the two are linked in a vicious circle
 Since mental disorders generate costs
 in terms of long-term treatment and
 lost productivity, it can be argued that
 such disorders contribute significantly
 to poverty. At the same time, insecuri
ty, low educational levels, inadequate
 housing and malnutrition have all
 been recognized as contributing to
 common mental disorders. There is
 scientific evidence that depression is
 1.5 to 2 times more prevalent among
 the low-income groups of a popula
tion. Poverty could therefore be con
sidered a significant contributor to
 mental disorders, and vice-versa. 
The two are thus linked in a vicious
 circle (Figure 11), and affect several
 dimensions of individual and social
 development:
 Work
 Unemployed persons and those who
 fail to gain employment have more
 depressive symptoms than individuals
 who find a job (Bolton & Oakley,
 1987; Kessler & al., 1989; Simon & al.,
 2000). Moreover, employed persons
 who have lost their jobs are twice as
 likely to be depressed as persons who
 retain their jobs (Dooley & al., 1994).
 Education
 Studies have shown a significant rela
tionship between the prevalence of
 common mental disorders and low
 educational levels (Patel & Kleinman,
 2003). Moreover, a low educational
 level prevents access to most profes
sional jobs, increases vulnerability and
 insecurity and contributes to a persis
tently low social capital. Illiteracy and
 illness therefore lock in poverty.
 11
 Violence and trauma
 In communities afflicted by poverty,
 violence and abuse are not unusual.
 They affect general mental well-being,
 and can induce mental disorders in the
 most vulnerable.
 Without well-targeted and structured
 investment in mental health, the
 vicious circle of poverty and mental
 disorders will be perpetuated, thereby
 preventing poverty alleviation and
 development. 
Poverty and mental disorders: a vicious circle
 Poverty
 Physical disorders
 Mental disorders
 Violence and trauma
 Suicide
 Alcohol
 Depression
 Substance Abuse
 Child/adolescent development problems
 Post traumatic stress disorders
 25
Promoting mental health; preventing 
and managing mental ill health
 In order to reduce the increasing 
burden of mental disorders and avoid
 years lived with disability or death,
 priority should be given to prevention
 and promotion in the field of mental
 health. Preventive and promotional
 strategies can be used by clinicians 
to target individual patients, and by 
public health programme planners 
to target large population groups.
 Integrating prevention and promotion
 programmes for mental health within
 overall public health strategies will
 help to avoid deaths, reduce the stig
ma attached to the persons with men
tal disorders and improve the social
 and economic environment.
 Is it possible to promote mental 
health and prevent mental disorders?
 Within the spectrum of mental
 health interventions, prevention and
 promotion have become realistic and
 evidence based, supported by a fast
growing body of knowledge from
 f
 ields as divergent as developmental
 psychopathology, psychobiology,
 prevention, and health promotion
 sciences (WHO, 2002). Prevention
 and promotion programmes have
 also been shown to result in consid
erable economic savings to society
 (Rutz et al., 1992).
 26
Much can be done to reduce the burdens of
 mental disorders, avoid deaths and promote
 mental health in the world.
 Mental health promotion
 Health promotion is the process of
 enabling people to gain increasing
 control over their health and improve
 it (WHO, 1986). It is therefore related
 to improving the quality of life and
 the potential for good health, rather
 than only an amelioration of symp
toms (Secker, 1998). Psychosocial 
factors influence a number of health
 behaviours (e.g. proper diet, adequate
 exercise, and avoiding cigarettes,
 drugs, excessive alcohol and risky sex
ual practices) that have a wide-rang
ing impact in the domain of health
 (WHO, 2002).
 A growing body of cross-cultural evi
dence indicates that various psycho
logical, social and behavioural factors
 can protect health and support posi
tive mental health. Such protection
 facilitates resistance (resilience) to dis
ease, minimizes and delays the emer
gence of disabilities and promotes
 more rapid recovery from illness
 (WHO, 2002). The following studies
 are illustrative. Breast-feeding (advo
cated by the joint WHO/UNICEF
 Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative, 
Naylor, 2001) improves bonding and
 attachment between infants and
 mothers, and significantly improves
 child development. Promotive inter
ventions in schools improve self
esteem, life skills, pro-social behaviour,
 scholastic performance and the overall
 climate. 
Among various psychosocial factors
 linked to protection and promotion in
 adults are secure attachment; an opti
mistic outlook on life, with a sense of
 purpose and direction; effective strate
gies for coping with challenge; per
ceived control over life outcomes;
 emotionally rewarding social relation
ships; expression of positive emotion;
 and social integration.
 Photo: © WHO, P. Virot
 27
When can interventions for 
prevention of mental disorders begin?
 Visits by nurses and community work
ers to mothers during pregnancy and
 after childbirth, in order to prevent
 poor child care, child abuse, psycho
logical and behavioural problems in
 children and postnatal depression in
 mothers, have proved to be extremely
 effective on a sustainable basis (Olds
 et al., 1988). Teaching mothers about
 early monitoring of growth and devel
opment in low-birth-weight babies,
 along with proper maternal advice,
 can prevent poor intellectual develop
ment (Infant Health and Development
 Programme, 1990). Early stimulation
 programmes can enable mothers to
 prevent the slow development often
 seen in preterm infants, and improve
 the physical growth and behaviour of
 such infants (WHO, 1998). Such pro
grammes can also reduce the number
 of days spent in hospital (Field et al.,
 1986), and thus result in economic
 savings. Nutrient supplements to pre
vent neuropsychiatric impairment
 have also been found to be useful. 
For example, iodine supplementation
 programmes through iodination of
 water or salt (recommended by WHO,
 1996; 2001) can help prevent cre
tinism and other iodine-deficiency dis
orders (Sood et al., 1997; Mubbashar,
 1999). Moreover, it may have a posi
tive effect on the intelligence level of
 even apparently healthy populations
 living in iodine-deficient areas (Ble
ichrodt & Born, 1994). 
Preventive strategies are useful 
even during childhood and adolescence
 Preventive interventions reduce
 depression and feelings of hopeless
ness, aggressive and delinquent
 behaviour, as well as alcohol, tobacco
 and drug use, on a sustained basis
 (Schweinhart & Weikart, 1992; WHO,
 1993; Bruene-Butler et al, 1997;
 Shochet et al, 2001). 
Training teachers and parents has
 been shown to improve detection of
 problems and facilitate appropriate
 interventions. 
28
A stitch in time
 Psychosocial interventions, such as
 cognitive-behavioural therapy and
 family-based group intervention for
 “high risk” children, prevent the
 development of anxiety disorders
 (Dadds et al., 1997) and reduce
 depressive symptoms and conduct
 problems (Jaycox et al., 1994).
 Depression in adolescence has a high
 risk of recurrence in adulthood, and is
 also associated with the risk of devel
opment of personality problems or
 conduct disorders. 
It is possible to prevent the majority 
of suicides and suicide attempts
 among schoolchildren through a com
prehensive schools-based prevention
 programme that includes appropriate
 modifications to school-based policy,
 teacher training, parent education,
 stress management and a life-skills
 curriculum, along with the introduc
tion of a crisis team in each school
 (Zenere & Lazarus, 1997).
 Veliana, 6 years old, Bulgaria
 29
How can prevention help adults and the elderly?
 There is considerable evidence which
 shows that preventive strategies
 improve marital, relational and occu
pational functioning. It is possible to
 reduce dysfunctional marital commu
nication, sexual difficulties, divorce
 and child abuse among young couples
 through education and skills training
 (Renick et al., 1992; Cowan & Cowan,
 1992). Programmes to cope with wid
owhood and bereavement have been
 seen to help reduce depressive symp
toms and facilitate better adjustment
 (Vachon et al., 1980). Similarly, studies
 have shown that stress-management
 skills and occupational stress-manage
ment training for personnel at risk
 (e.g. nursing personnel, bus drivers,
 teachers and blue collar workers) can
 be very useful. It has also be seen that
 retrenched workers who received ade
quate counselling coped better, had
 fewer depressive symptoms and man
aged to find better jobs (Vinokur et
 al., 1992). Retrenchment and job loss
 can cause depression, anxiety and
 many other problems such as alco
holism, marital stress and child abuse,
 and can even can lead to suicide.
 Physician advice and other forms of
 brief intervention have been found to
 be effective in reducing alcohol abuse
 (Babor & Grant, 1992). Brief interven
tions have also been tried to reduce
 smoking (Kottke et al., 1988). Strate
gies to prevent alcohol and other sub
stance abuse through mass
 campaigns, including the use of alco
hol warning labels, have been success
ful in raising awareness (MacKinnon
 et al., 2000). Similarly, community
intervention programmes aimed at
 women, that involve community coali
tions, task forces and support groups,
 help reduce smoking (Secker-Walker
 et al., 2000).
 The introduction of mandatory bicycle
 helmet use leads to a substantial
 reduction in head injuries that can
 cause neurological and mental disabili
ties (Cameron et al., 1994). Short cog
nitive-behavioural programmes for
 victims of vehicular and industrial acci
dents (Fecteau & Nicki, 1999; Bryant
 et al., 1998) are beneficial in the pre
vention and management of post
traumatic stress disorder.
 30
Prevention of suicidal behaviour
 The prevention of suicidal behaviour
 (both attempted and completed sui
cide) poses a series of particular chal
lenges at the public health level. On
 the one hand, subjects at risk of suici
dal behaviour cover a wide age range,
 from early adolescence to later life.
 On the other hand, the risk of suicidal
 behaviour varies greatly according to
 several sociocultural factors (among
 which age, gender, religion, socioeco
nomic status) and mental status. 
It is also influenced by the availability
 of methods used for that behaviour.
 This diversity calls for an integration of
 different approaches at the population
 level in order to achieve significant
 results. 
According to the best evidence avail
able (WHO, 1998), the following
 interventions have demonstrated effi
cacy in preventing some forms of sui
cidal behaviour:
 • Control of availability of toxic sub
stances (particularly pesticides in
 rural areas of some Asian countries);
 • Detoxification of domestic gas and
 car exhaustion;
 • Treatment of people with mental
 disorders (particularly depression,
 alcoholism and schizophrenia);
 • Reduction of access to firearms; and
 • Toning down of press reports about
 suicides.
 Hoang Gia, 9 years old, Vietnam
 31
Treatment of mental disorders: 
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
 The widening recognition of mental
 health as a significant international
 public health issue has led to the
 growing need to demonstrate that
 investment of resources in service
 development is not only required, 
but also worthwhile. Specifically, it 
is important to collect evidence of
 effective and appropriate mental
 health care strategies that are also
 12
 Treatment effects on disability
 Percent total improvement in disability 
50%
 40%
 30%
 20%
 cost-effective and sustainable.
 Although the volume of completed
 studies remains modest, particularly 
in middle- and low-income countries,
 there is increasing economic evidence
 to support the argument that inter
ventions for schizophrenia, depression
 and other mental disorders are not
 only available and effective, but are
 also affordable and cost-effective.
 10%
 0%
 Schizophrenia 
Bipolar disorder 
Depression 
Panic disorder
 Psychosocial effect
 Drug effect
 Placebo effect
 32
How effective are treatments for 
burdensome psychiatric conditions?
 There is considerable literature con
cerning the efficacy and effectiveness
 of a wide range of pharmacological,
 psychosocial and care management
 strategies for treating both psychiatric
 disorders and addiction. Figure 12 on
 opposite page illustrates the reduction
 in disability following pharmacological
 and psychosocial treatment, alone or
 in combination. As can be seen, the
 extent of improvement over no treat
ment at all is as much as 50%. Thus,
 while currently available interventions
 do not completely cure the disability
 associated with these conditions, they
 have a substantial advantage over no
 treatment at all, which unfortunately,
 is often the case. This raises the ques
tion of the costs involved in realizing
 these health improvements.
 Figure 13 illustrates the effectiveness
 of treatment, provided through com
munity outreach care (low-cost drug
 therapy and basic psychosocial sup
port), on the economic burden and
 disability of untreated schizophrenia 
in India; not only did disability
 improve dramatically, but the overall
 costs associated with the condition
 (which included care-giving time by
 family members) also fell. These
 effects were sustained over an 18
month follow-up period. 
13 
Changes in disability following community outreach treatment  
of untreated schizophrenia in rural India
 60
 WHODAS II disability score
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
 0
 0 3 6 9 12 15 18
 Follow-up assessment (months)
 33
What are the costs of effective treatment?
 The alarmingly low level of resources
 available in developing countries to
 treat mental health problems, relative
 to the affected population for which
 the resources are needed, has been
 highlighted by the WHO ATLAS pro
ject (WHO, 2001). The generation of
 14 
a more evidence-based approach to
 mental health budgetary planning,
 resource allocation and service devel
opment represents an underdeveloped
 but much needed component of
 national mental health policy in devel
oping regions of the world.
 The annual cost per case (or episode) of evidence-based psychiatric treatment
 Cost per treated case (in international dollars, I$)
 Africa
 Latin  America
 WHO has embarked upon the world
wide collection of such an evidence
 base by means of its WHO-CHOICE
 project, including estimation of the
 cost and efficiency of a range of key
 treatment strategies for burdensome
 mental disorders. Figure 14 below
 Middle East
 Eastern Europe
 SE Asia
 W Pacific
 34
 0
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
 Schizophrenia
 Older anti-psychotic drug
 +psychosocial treatment
 Bipolar disorder:
 Mood stabiliser drug
 +psychosocial treatment
 Depression:
 Older anti-depressant drug 
+proactive care
 Panic disorder:
 Older anti-depressant drug
 +psychosocial treatment
 2500
shows the estimated cost of first-line
 treatment of schizophrenia and bipo
lar disorder on a hospital outpatient
 basis, and also the cost of primary
 care of depression and panic disorder,
 based on estimated use of health care
 resources that would be required to
 produce the expected reduction in dis
ability. Costs are expressed in interna
tional dollars (I$), which take into
 account the purchasing power of dif
ferent countries. It is clear that more
 severe psychiatric conditions such as
 schizophrenia require substantially
 greater resource inputs (mainly
 because a proportion of cases need to
 be hospitalized or provided with resi
dential care outside hospital). By con
trast, the cost of effectively treating an
 episode of depression is estimated to
 be in the region of I$ 100–150. 
Cost-effectiveness should be just one of several criteria used in the decision
making process for funding prevention/treatment of mental disorders. 
These economic evaluations should be supplemented by other arguments.
 For example: 
• People with mental disorders are more at risk of human rights violations
 and are more likely to be discriminated against in accessing treatment and
 care;
 • Achievement of physical health targets, such as:– Infant and child mortality can be reduced through improved treatment 
of postnatal depression;– HIV/AIDS infection rates for the 17-24 year-old age group are reduced
 because improved mental health reduces unsafe sex and drug use;– There is better adherence to treatments for other ailments (e.g. tubercu
losis, HIV/AIDS, hypertension, diabetes and cancer treatments);
 • Caregivers benefit from a lower burden of care, which means better quality
 of life and fewer work days lost, and thus less loss of income; 
• Employers benefit from better working environment, reduced absenteeism
 and higher productivity;
 • Governments benefit from less cost-shifting and transfer payments;
 • Mental health is a key variable in successful programmes for sustainable
 development and poverty reduction.
 35
The gap between the burden of
 mental disorders and resources
 15 
Treatment gap rates (%) by disorder (world) 
100
 80
 60
 40
 20
 0
 Even though mental, brain and sub
stance-use disorders can be managed
 effectively with medication and/or
 psychosocial interventions, only a
 small minority of patients with mental
 disorders receives even the most basic
 treatment. Initial treatment is fre
quently delayed for many years. In
 developed countries with well-orga
nized health care systems, between
 44% and 70% of patients with
 depression, schizophrenia, alcohol-use
 disorders and child and adolescent
 mental illnesses do not receive treat
ment (Figure 15) in any given year. 
In developing countries, where the
 treatment gap is likely to be closer to
 90% for these disorders, most individ
uals with severe mental disorders are
 left to cope as best they can. 
Schizophrenia
 Major
 depression
 More than 40% of all countries
 worldwide have no mental health 
policy and over 30% have no mental
 health programme. Over 90% of
 countries have no mental health policy
 that includes children and adolescents.
 Out-of-pocket expenditure was the
 primary method of financing mental
 health care in many (16.4%) coun
tries. Even in countries where insur
ance cover is provided, health plans
 frequently do not cover mental and
 behavioural disorders at the same
 level as other illnesses; this creates 
significant economic difficulties for
 patients and their families. 
36
 Alcohol use
 disorder
 Child/adolescent
 mental disorders
 Treated
 Untreated
Mental health budget in low-income countries: 
non-existent or inadequate
 In spite of the importance of a sepa
rate mental health budget within the
 overall health budget, 32% of coun
tries included in the ATLAS study
 (WHO, 2001) reported not having a
 specific governmental budget for
 mental health. Of those that actually
 reported having one, 36.3% spent
 less than 1% of their total health 
budget on mental health. Countries
 categorized on the basis of income
 levels (World Bank classification) differ
 considerably in terms of the propor
tion of their governmental budget for
 mental health to their total health
 budget (Figure 16). The poorer coun
tries have small health budgets, from
 which they spend a lower percentage
 on mental health, resulting in very few
 resources being available. Poor provi
sion of mental health care results in
 poor outcomes, avoidable relapses
 and insufficient rehabilitation. 
16 
Share of mental health budget in total health budget
 of countries by income level (%) (World Bank classification)
 100%
 80%
 60%
 40%
 20%
 1.54 2.78 3.49 6.89
 0%
 Low income
 Total Health Budget
 Low Middle
 Income
 Higher Middle
 Income
 High Income
 37
 Mental Health Budget
The relationship between the burden of
 mental disorders and spending is clearly
 inappropriate.
 A wide gap between the burden of 
neuropsychiatric disorders and the mental health budget
 Mental and behavioural disorders are
 estimated to account for 13% of the
 global burden of disease, yet, on aver
age, the mental health budgets of
 countries constitute only 2% of their
 total health expenditures (Figure 17). 
Photo: © A. Mohit
 17 
Burden of neuropsychiatric disorders vs budget
 15%
 12%
 9%
 6%
 3%
 0%
 13%
 Burden of
 neuropsychiatric disorders
 as a percentage 
 of all disorders
 2%
 Median mental health 
budget as a percentage 
of total government 
health budget
 38
Urgent action is needed to close the
 treatment gap and to overcome barriers which
 prevent people from receiving appropriate
 care.
 There are several barriers to people’s access 
to appropriate mental health care
 Stigma 
Around the world, many people with
 mental disorders are victimized for
 their illness and become the targets of
 unfair discrimination. Access to hous
ing, employment and normal societal
 opportunities is often compromised. 
Discrimination in insurance
 coverage for mental disorders
 In many countries, since mental disor
ders are not covered by health insur
ance schemes, many people cannot
 afford treatment. One-quarter of all
 countries do not provide disability
 benefits to patients with mental disor
ders. One-third of the world’s popula
tion – 2 billion people – lives in
 countries that spend less than 1% of
 their health budgets on mental health.
 Lack of drugs 
Though 85% of countries have an
 essential drugs list that countries use
 as a basis for procuring therapeutic
 drugs, almost 20% of countries do
 not have at least one common anti
depressant, one antipsychotic, and
 one antiepileptic in primary care.
 Wrong priorities
 Too many countries (mainly developed
 countries) still spend most of their
 resources on a few large mental asy
lums, which focus only on a small
 fraction of those who need treatment;
 even these institutions generally pro
vide poor quality care and often inhu
mane conditions and treatment.
 Lack of skills at the primary
 health care level 
Too few doctors and nurses know
 how to recognize and properly treat
 mental disorders. In 41% of countries
 there are no mental health training
 programmes for primary health care
 professionals.
 Lack of rational and
 comprehensive mental health
 policies and legislation 
• 40% of countries do not have 
a mental health policy;
 • 25% of countries do not have 
mental health legislation; and 
• 30% of countries do not have a
 national mental health programme.
 39
WHO Global Action Programme
 (mhGAP)
 Year of Mental Health: 2001
 WHO declared 2001 the Year of Men
tal Health and that year’s World
 Health Day was a resounding success.
 Over 150 countries organized impor
tant activities, including major speech
es by political leaders and the
 adoption of new mental health legisla
tion and programmes.
 At the 2002 World Health Assembly,
 over 130 Ministers responded posi
tively with a clear and unequivocal
 message: mental health, neglected for
 too long, is crucial to the overall well
being of individuals, societies and
 countries, and must be universally
 regarded in a new light. The theme of
 the World Health Report 2001 was
 mental health, and its 10 recommen
dations have been positively received
 by all Member States. 
18
 As a result of the activities in 2001,
 the Mental Health Global Action Pro
gramme (mhGAP) has been created.
 mhGAP is WHO’s major new effort to
 implement the recommendations of
 the World Health Report 2001. The
 programme is based on four strategies
 (Figure 18) that should help enhance
 the mental health of populations.
 Mental Health Global Action Programme (mhGAP):
 the four core strategies
 Increased  
country  
capacity
 Enhanced  
mental 
health 
services
 Reduced 
stigma and 
discrimination
 Reduced 
disease 
burden
 Enhanced 
mental 
health of 
populations
 Information  
for better  
decisions
 Advocacy  
against  
stigma and  
discrimination
 Integrated  
policy and  
service  
development
 Enhanced  
public health  
research  
capacity
 40
Advocacy, information, policy and research
 are the key words underlying WHO’s new
 global mental health programme, which aims
 at closing the gap between those who receive
 care and those who do not. 
Strategy 1
 Increasing and improving information for decision-making and tech
nology transfer to increase country capacity. 
WHO is collecting information about the magnitude and the burden of mental
 disorders around the world, and about the resources (human, financial, socio
cultural) that are available in countries to respond to the burden generated by
 mental disorders. WHO is disseminating mental health-related technologies
 and knowledge to empower countries in developing preventive measures and
 promoting appropriate treatment for mental, neurological and substance
abuse disorders.
 Strategy 2
 Raising awareness about mental disorders through education and
 advocacy for more respect of human rights and less stigma. 
The World Health Organization is establishing the first all-inclusive global
 partnership of mental health-related constituencies: the Global Council for
 Mental Health. It will act as a forum for mental health, stimulating and lend
ing support to activities aimed at promoting implementation of the 10 rec
ommendations of the World Health Report 2001 in all regions. Professional
 NGOs, family members and consumer groups, leaders of religious groups,
 parliamentarians, labour and business organizations are all enthusiastic about
 pursuing activities for the improvement of mental health through this com
mon platform led by WHO. 
41
At the Executive Board meeting in January 2002 a resolution on
 mental health encouraging continued activity in this area was
 adopted. The resolution strongly supports the direction of mhGAP
 and urges action by Member States. The resolution was endorsed
 unanimously by the World Health Assembly in May 2002.
 Strategy 3
 Assisting countries in designing policies and developing comprehensive and effective mental health ser
vices. The scarcity of resource forces their rational use.
 The World Health Report 2001 and the Atlas: Mental Health Resources in the World, have revealed an unsatisfactory
 situation with regard to mental health care in many countries, particularly in developing countries. WHO is engaged in
 providing technical assistance to Ministries of Health in developing mental health policy and services. Building national
 capacity is a priority to enhance the mental health of populations. 
WHO has designed a mental health policy and service guidelines to address the wide variety of needs and priorities in
 policy development and service planning, and a manual on how to reform and implement mental health law.
 To put plans into action, WHO is adapting the level and types of implementation to the general level of resources of
 individual countries. In the particular case of developing countries, where the gap between mental health needs and the
 resources to meet them is greater, WHO will offer differentiated packages of “achievable targets” for implementation
 (Gap Reduction Achievable National Targets/GRANTs) to countries grouped by at least three levels of resources (low,
 middle and relatively higher). These packages provide the minimum required set of feasible actions to be undertaken to
 comply with the 10 recommendations spelt out in the World Health Report 2001. Achievement of the identified targets
 will influence both health and social outcomes, namely mortality due to suicide or to alcohol/illicit drugs, morbidity and
 disability due to the key mental disorders, quality of life, and, finally, human rights. 
Strategy 4
 Building local capacity for public mental health research in poor countries.
 Besides advocacy, policy assistance and knowledge transfer, mhGAP formulates in some detail the active role that infor
mation and research ought to play in the multidimensional efforts required to change the current mental health gap at
 country level. 
WHO is developing several projects and activities to promote this strategy at country level, including a research fellow
ship programme targeting developing countries. A project on the cost-effectiveness of mental health strategies is being
 implemented in selected countries to generate real estimates on the costs and benefits of mental health interventions.
 These estimates will then be used to enhance mental health services at country level